WiFiViz
=============

.. include:: replace.txt
.. highlight:: cpp

WiFiViz is a contrib module for |ns3| Wi-Fi simulations. It provides a
Qt frontend for creating scenarios, generating scratch scripts, running
simulations, and inspecting PHY/MAC behavior through shared-memory trace
records.

The source code lives in ``contrib/wifiviz`` when installed in an |ns3|
source tree. User scripts should include ``ns3/wifiviz.h`` and use the
``WiFiVizHelper`` alias.

Scope and Limitations
---------------------

The module focuses on Wi-Fi visualization workflows:

* GUI-based AP/STA scenario configuration.
* JSON scenario persistence and scratch-script generation.
* One-command attachment to existing scripts through ``WiFiVizHelper``.
* PPDU, channel-state, PHY-state, throughput, delay, RX-outcome, MCS, and
  frame-composition visualization.

The module does not modify |ns3| core files. Full GUI mode uses an optional
scratch launcher copied from ``contrib/wifiviz/tools/visualizer.cc`` to
``scratch/visualizer.cc``. The current automated regression tests are minimal;
visual and workflow validation should be repeated before each release.

Usage
-----

Install the module as:

.. code-block:: text

   /path/to/ns-3/contrib/wifiviz

Configure and build |ns3| from the |ns3| root:

.. code-block:: bash

   ./ns3 configure
   ./ns3 build

For full GUI mode, run the module example launcher through |ns3|:

.. code-block:: bash

   ./ns3 run wifiviz-visualizer

For one-command mode, a user script can expose a command-line flag and call the
helper:

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "ns3/wifiviz.h"

   bool enableWiFiViz = false;
   bool precise = true;
   uint32_t rough = 1;

   CommandLine cmd(__FILE__);
   cmd.AddValue("enable-wifiviz", "Enable WiFiViz timeline capture", enableWiFiViz);
   cmd.AddValue("precise", "Record every PPDU when true", precise);
   cmd.AddValue("rough", "Sample one PPDU out of rough records when precise=false", rough);
   cmd.Parse(argc, argv);

   NetDeviceContainer allDevices = WiFiVizHelper::MergeDevices(apDevices, staDevices);
   WiFiVizHelper::ConfigureVisualizerSampling(precise, rough);
   Ptr<SniffUtils> sniffer =
       WiFiVizHelper::MaybeEnableVisualizer(enableWiFiViz,
                                         allDevices,
                                         simulationTime,
                                         true);

Then run:

.. code-block:: bash

   ./ns3 run "your-script --enable-wifiviz=1 --precise=1 --rough=1"

Helpers
~~~~~~~

``WiFiVizHelper`` provides convenience functions for merging device containers,
configuring visualization sampling, and enabling trace capture for an existing
script. The returned ``SniffUtils`` object connects to Wi-Fi PHY/MAC trace
sources and writes records to shared memory consumed by the Qt frontend.

Attributes
~~~~~~~~~~

Not applicable. The module currently exposes behavior through helper methods,
command-line values in user scripts, and JSON scenario files generated by the
Qt frontend.

Traces
~~~~~~

The module consumes Wi-Fi PHY/MAC events from |ns3| scripts and reconstructs
records for:

* PPDU start/end timing and metadata.
* Channel busy, idle, and collision intervals.
* PHY state transitions.
* Per-node throughput and frame categories.
* Delay, MCS, and RX-outcome statistics when available.

Examples and Tests
------------------

Example scripts are provided in ``examples/``:

* ``wifiviz-basic-example.cc`` is a minimal runnable AP/STA UDP script showing
  the recommended ``#include "ns3/wifiviz.h"`` and ``WiFiVizHelper`` pattern.

Default GUI scenarios are stored in ``Simulation/Default/`` and are used by
the Qt scenario library.

The unit test suite is in ``test/wifiviz-test-suite.cc``. It checks helper
device merging, sampling environment configuration, and the disabled path
without launching the Qt viewer.

Validation
----------

The module has been exercised through the GUI workflow and example scripts on
ns-3.48. Automated coverage is currently focused on lightweight helper behavior.

References
----------

* |ns3| documentation and model contribution guidelines.
* Qt documentation for the frontend application framework.
